# Binary Search, More on Reasoning About Loops

Suppose the array is sorted in non-decreasing order.  Now can we write a faster method?

## Proposed Algorithm (Binary Search)
1. Examine the middle element.
2. If the middle element is smaller than x, repeat on the upper half of the array.
3. If the middle element is larger than x, repeat on the bottom half of the array.

## Here is our first incorrect attempt:
```
	/** Return the index of x in a or -1 if x is not in array.
	 * Precondition: a is sorted in non-decreasing order
   */
	public static int binarySearch(int x, int[] array) {
	  int front = 0;                      // stores the smallest index of array in the region still being considered
	  int back  = array.length - 1;       // stores the largest index of array in the region still being considered
	  while (front != back) {
	    int mid = (front + back) / 2;
	    if (x < array[mid])
	      back = mid;
	    else if (x > array[mid])
	      front = mid;
	    else /* only other case is x == array[mid] */
	      return mid;
	  }
	  return -1;
	}
```

## Subgoals
Loops are tricky to get completely correct so it is not surprising that our first attempt is not quite correct. Because of that, computer scientists have developed mathematical logic to reason about loops.

1. we have to decide what the goal of our loop is. (Note, this is another reason why we want our loops to do just one task. It makes describing the goal easier.)

2. Given the goal for the loop, we must next determine what the __subgoal__ for each loop iteration is.
  * The subgoal (in formal math terms the subgoal is called the __"loop invariant"__) is what we _need to accomplish with __each iteration__ of the loop in order to achieve the goal._

Verifying that a loop is correct means that we verify that we are able to achieve the subgoal after each iteration, and we verify that the loop will eventually stop.

__A correct subgoal has the following properties:__
* The subgoal is true after each iteration of the loop.
* The subgoal is true just __before the first iteration of the loop.__  (Technically, this can be thought of as the same as (a) by saying that if you have not entered the loop, then you are at the end of the "0th" iteration.)
* The subgoal AND the loop condition being false logically implies the goal of the loop.

## Fixing the Loop
__Let us check the reasoning of our loop.__
1. What is the goal?
  * At the end of the loop, `x` should not be in array. (Because if we reached the end of the loop, we did not return `x`.)
2. What is the subgoal for each loop iteration?
  * After each iteration, if `x` is in array, it is in array[front...back] (i.e. it is between front and back, inclusive).

Now let us verify the subgoal.  Recall the three properties we need:
* The subgoal is true after each iteration of the loop.
* The subgoal is true just __before the first iteration of the loop.__  (Technically, this can be thought of as the same as (a) by saying that if you have not entered the loop, then you are at the end of the "0th" iteration.)
* The subgoal AND the loop condition being false logically implies the goal of the loop.

Property b is easy to verify.  Before we start the loop, front = 0 and back = array.length - 1.  Of course, if x is in array it will be in array[0..length-1].

__Property c is does not hold in our loop:__
When the loop condition becomes false, the subgoal and the condition being false implies the goal.
  * The loop condition becomes false when front == back. The subgoal is now:
  > If x is in array, it is in array[front...front]"
  That does NOT logically imply the loop goal!  x could still be in array if x is at array[front].

Using the logic reasoning, we see that our loop is incorrect. Maybe thorough testing would have found this problem, but the error will only occur in specific situations (do you see why?).

Let us fix the method by changing the loop condition so that when it is false we do get the loop goal:
`while (front <= back) {`

Now, when the loop stops, `back < front` and so the loop subgoal becomes
> "if x is in array, it is in array[front..(front-1)]", and an array where the first index is larger than the last index is mathematically empty.


__Next, we will check point (b): the subgoal must be true after each iteration.__ We skipped this part in lecture.
The way you verify this is check that if the loop subgoal is true at the start of the iteration, then it is still true at the end of the iteration. See if you can reason through the code and verify that we always achieve the loop subgoal.

Are we done?  We verified the loop subgoal so the logic of our loop is correct, but we still must verify that the loop terminates. Having a logically correct loop does no good if the loop runs forever.

## Are we guaranteed that the loop will terminate, or could it run forever?
To guarantee that it does not run forever, we have to show that the gap between front and back decreases with each iteration.  __Thus, either front increases or back decreases.__

Is it possible to have a situation where front and back to do not change?  YES!!  Consider `front = 5` and `back = 6` and the element we are looking for is at `index 6`.  Note that in this situation, `mid = 5`, `array[mid]` is smaller than the element, and so `front = mid = 5`.  __front never changed!__

What is our fix?  To note that we know that the element is not at the `array[mid]` and so we will not include it. Since we know that `front <= mid <= back`, setting `front = mid + 1` and `back = mid - 1` __guarantees__ that       either front is increased or back is decreased on each iteration.

__Here is the corrected code:__
```
	/** Return the index of x in a or -1 if x is not in array.
	  * Precondition: a is sorted in non-decreasing order
	  */
	public static int binarySearch(int x, int[] array) {
	  int front = 0;                      // stores the smallest index of array in the region still being considered
	  int back = array.length - 1;        // stores the largest index of array in the region still being considered
	  while (front <= back) {
	    int mid = (front + back) / 2;
	    if (x < array[mid])
	      back = mid - 1;
	    else if (x > array[mid])
	      front = mid + 1;
	    else /* only other case is x == array[mid] */
	      return mid;
	  }
	  return -1;
	}

```

# Summary
The moral is that using the formal logic reasoning helps us design correct loops before we code them into the program.
