# Java 8 Shortcuts for Anonymous classes: The "lambda" expression and the "method reference" expression.

Java has created two shortcuts that can be used for creating anonymous classes in the special case that the class is implementing __an interface that contains a single method stub.__
* The "lambda" shortcut
* The "method reference" shortcut
---

# The "lambda" shortcut for anonymous classes
* The Java "lambda" shortcut is not a true lambda.  (In programming languages, __a lambda expression is an anonymous function that can be stored to a variable, input to another function, returned from a function, etc.)__
  * While the "lambda" shortcut makes it `-appear-` that we are giving a function as input to a method, we are really giving an instance of an anonymous class as input to the method.

* __Example 1:__
  * A basic anonymous class with a method that takes one input and no return value:
  * Recall the `EventHandler` interface.  It has a single method stub `handle(ActionEvent e)`.
	* Here is code creating an anonymous class implementing the interface:
  ```
  b.setOnAction(new EventHandler<ActionEvent>() {
    public void handle(ActionEvent e) {
      System.out.println("I was clicked");
    }
  });
  ```
  * Here is the `"lambda"` shortcut.  Because there is only one method in `EventHandler`, there is no ambiguity about which method is being overridden.  All we need to know is what the `input parameter name` is and what the `body of the method` is.
 * Java uses the `"->"` symbol to indicate that we are using the shortcut.
  * How does Java know that this is an `EventHandler` anonymous class?  Because that is the parameter type for `setOnAction`!
  ```  
  b.setOnAction((ActionEvent e) -> {
                                   System.out.println("I was clicked");
                                   }
                                );
  ```
We can shorten it a little more by noting that the parameter type is also not needed:
```
b.setOnAction((e) -> {
                              System.out.println("I was clicked");
                     });
```
Even more, since there is only one line in the body, we can remove the { }, and since there is only one input parameter, we can remove the ( ) around it to get the very short:
```
    b.setOnAction(e -> System.out.println("I was clicked"));
```

* __Example 2:__ A non-void method in the interface
  * We did an example with the Comparator interface.  It has many methods but a single non-default method stub: `compare`
  * Here is an example:
  ```
	  public static Comparator<Employee> compareBySalary() {
	    return new CompareBySalary();
	  }

	  private static class CompareBySalary implements Comparator<Employee> {
	    public int compare(Employee e1, Employee e2) {
	      return (int)((e1.getSalary() - e2.getSalary()) * 100);
	    }
	  }
  ```
  * We will use the `lambda` expression.  Java knows that we are creating and returning a `Comparator<Employee>` because that is the return type of the method.
  * `Comparator` has a single (non-default) method stub, and so there is no confusion about which method we are overriding.
  * Therefore, we can drop the interface name, the method name, and the input type.  __All that we need is the name of the input parameters and the body of the method.__
  ```
	public static Comparator<Employee> compareBySalary() {
	  return (e1, e2) -> {
			       return (int)((e1.getSalary() - e2.getSalary()) * 100);
	                     };
	}
  ```
  * As before we can drop the `{ }` because it is one line, and since the only line is a return statement, we can drop the return.  Java knows that the method has to return a value. It just needs to know what value.
  ```
	public static Comparator<Employee> compareBySalary() {
	  return (e1, e2) -> (int)((e1.getSalary() - e2.getSalary()) * 100);
	}
  ```
