# Java Optional

* The Java `Optional` type is a class added to the Java 8 API. A feature of functional languages that is starting to show up in other languages like Java is the `"monad"`.
* A `monad` is a type that wraps a value, and the wrapper type can be used to get information about the value.
* __The Java Optional is a monad that wraps a value that may be null.__
  * The Java Optional let's us define operations on the value and the __`Optional` takes care of the null case for us.__
* Consider something like your first project. In the first project, you have an `InsurancePolicy` that contained a supplemental
insurance policy.  When handling a claim, you had to check whether the supplemental insurance policy was null before you
handled the claim.

* Here is a similar idea, shortened for the lecture.  A customer has a bunch of bank accounts, and the accounts may by null.
```
	public class Account {
	   private double balance;

	   public double getBalance() {
	     return balance;
	   }

	   public void deposit(double amount) {
	     balance += amount;
	   }
	}

	public class Customer {
	   private Account savings   = null;
	   private Account checking  = null;
	   private Account loan      = null;

 	   /* the getter and setter methods */

	}
```
Suppose we want the total value of all the accounts, but since the different accounts may not exist, you had to check for null in a large if.
```
	public double getTotal() {
	  double total = 0.0;

	  if (getSavings() != null)
	    total += getSavings().getBalance();

	  if (getChecking() != null)
	    total += getChecking().getBalance();

	  if (getLoan() != null)
	    total -= getLoan().getBalance();

	  return amount;
	}
```
This type of pattern: __check whether a value is null before accessing it, is used throughout Java code.  It is tedious to write and it makes the code look complicated.__

* The `Optional` class will let us reduce some of the complexity of the code. We will store the `Account` objects into an `Optional`, and the `Optional` will take care of the `null` tests for us.
* First, we change the savings, etc, variables from type Account to type Optional<Account>:
```
	public class Customer {
	   private Optional<Account> savings;
	   private Optional<Account> checking;
	   private Optional<Account> loan;


     Then, instead of them starting with value null, we start them with value Optional.empty().  This is an Optional object that stores null.

	public class Customer {
	   private Optional<Account> savings   = Optional.empty();
	   private Optional<Account> checking  = Optional.empty();
	   private Optional<Account> loan      = Optional.empty();


      Now, for the setter methods, we will take a Account input and use the Optiona.ofNullable to wrap it into an Optional object:

	  public void setSavings(Account savings) {
	    savings = Optional.ofNullable(savings);
	  }
```
For the getter methods, we will return the Optional
```
	  public Optional<Account> getSavings() {
	    return savings;
	  }
```

## Using the `Optional` objects.
Now, we need to use the Optional to write the `getTotalBalance()` method without all the null tests.

The `Optional` class has a bunch of methods we can run on the Optional object.  All of these methods will check to see if the object inside the `Optional` is `null` before running the function. One basic such method is `map`. `map` takes an interface as input. The interface has an apply function that has input `T` and output `U`.
* The `T` is the type stored in the Optional.
* The `U` can be any type.
* `map` then returns an `Optional<U>`.

For example, if we are going to get the balance on a `Account` in the `Optional` object, then the input `T` of apply is `Account` and the output `U` of apply is `Double`, the output of `getBalance`:
```
	  public Double apply(Account a) {
	    return a.getBalance();
	  }
```
Now, since apply is the only non-default method stub of the interface, we can use the lambda syntax!
```
	savings.map(a -> a.getBalance())
```
__What does this do?  It creates an anonymous class for the interface that map expects as input.__
* The interface has the apply method, and we overrode that method so that it takes input `Account a` and outputs `a.getBalance()`.
* The `map` function then returns an `Optional<Double>`.
* The `Optional<Double>` will store a `Double` that is the balance of the Account if the Account is not `null`, and it stores `null` if the Account is `null`.
* Finally, we need to turn the `Optional` back into a double value so we can use it in our function.
* `Optional` has several methods we can use, a useful one is `orElse`.
  * `orElse` takes as input the value that should be returned if the `Optional` is holding `null`.  Otherwise the function returns the value of the `Optional`.

Here is the code:
```
	public double getTotal() {
	  double total = 0.0;

	  total += getSavings().map(a -> a.getBalance()).orElse(0.0);
	  total += getChecking().map(a -> a.getBalance()).orElse(0.0);
	  total -= getLoan().map(a -> a.getBalance()).orElse(0.0);

	  return total;
	}
```
If you note, we are creating there different anonymous classes.  We could just create one since they do exactly the same thing:
```
	public double getTotal() {
	  double total = 0.0;
          Function<Account, Double> getBalance = a -> a.getBalance();

	  total += getSavings().map(getBalance).orElse(0.0);
	  total += getChecking().map(getBalance).orElse(0.0);
	  total -= getLoan().map(getBalance).orElse(0.0);

	  return total;
	}
```
The thing to remember is that the Optional is another kind of wrapper class, like the wrapper classes Integer, Double, etc. However, now Java does not provide automatic wrapping and unwrapping.  Instead, we have to do it ourselves.

For example, let's deposit 100 into savings for some customer: `Customer c`
```
	c.getSavings()  does not return an Account, it returns the Optional that wraps the account.
	c.getSavings().get()  unwraps the Account so, for the deposit we do
	c.getSavings().get().deposit(100)
```
One catch is that the get() method will throw an exception if the value is null.  So, we can use the Optional directly:
```
	c.getSavings().ifPresent(a -> a.deposit(100));
```
