# A couple issues with JavaFX:

## JavaFX and Threads
* `JavaFX` uses the threads of your computer.  We will discuss that later, but what that means for us now is that when you run the JavaFX application, it takes over your interactions pane.  You will no longer be able to enter anything in the pane.
* If you need to debug a `JavaFX` application, the best way is with the debugger.

## Static Constructors and JavaFX
* `JavaFX` uses static initializers in a way that creates some issues with how we can test and call `JavaFX` methods.
  * For example, if we create a button `Button b = new Button();`
  * `JavaFX` loads a bunch of classes when doing new Button, and these classes have static initializers that __will throw an error if the JavaFX Applications's launch method was not run.__
  * As a result, if you try to use `new Button()` in the interactions pane or in a method that is called outside of a `JavaFX` Application (such as a `JUnit` test), the code will throw an exception.
  * This makes `JavaFX` hard to use with the interactions pane.  When you call `Application.launch()`, the code does not return control to the interactions pane.
  * As a result, you can't do anything more in the interactions pane.  But if you don't call `Application.launch()`, then calling `new Button()` in the interactions pane will throw an exception.
  * Later in the course, when we discuss "threads", I will show you how you can get around this so you can use the interacitons pane, but for now, the best way to debug a `JavaFX` application is to use a debugger.

## Debugging Code
* We started the lecture with a demonstration of the debugger.  Because `JavaFX` grabs the interactions pane while it executes, you can no longer use the interactions pane to test your JavaFX program.
* DrJava has a debugger as part of the program.  (Almost all IDE's have a debugger, and all of them behave similarly.)
* To use the debugger, you must have the Java SDK loaded on your system.  The default compiler that comes with DrJava does not have all the features needed to run the debugger.

## Key terms:
* `Breakpoint`:  This is a spot in your code where you want the execution to pause.  You set this using the menu you get when you right click the mouse while on the code.
  * Then you can run your code by entering appropriate Java into the interactions pane.  When the execution reaches the breakpoint, the execution will pause.
* `Stack Trace`:  This is a list of the methods on the call stack at the moment when the execution has paused.
* `Watch List`:  You can enter variables into the watch list, and the current values will be displayed.
  * You can also type in any expression (including variable names) into the interactions pane to see what the value of the expression is.
  * You can change the value of variables in the interactions pane, but the value listed in the watch list will not be immediately updated.

## Debugger controls:
* `Step over`:  Execute the next line of the program as a single step, and then pause.
* `Step into`:  Execute the next line of the program.  If the next line is a method call, go into that method and execute only its first line, and then pause.
* `Step out`:   Go out to the current line of the calling method.
* `Resume`: Continue execution.  The program will run until it reaches the next break point.
