# Anonymous Classes
An anonymous class is one defined in the new expression that is creating the instance of the class.
```
new InterfaceToImplement() {  code to override the various methods here };
```
  or
```
new ClassToExtend() {  code to extend the class by overriding methods here };
```
Note, that you should not create new methods when writing an anonymous class, but __you should just override existing methods.__

To see why, think about the polymorphism rules.  __What is the current-type of an instance of the anonymous class?__

In `ButtonGUI`, we created an anonymous class for another button's event handler
```
	    button3.setOnAction(new EventHandler<ActionEvent>)() {   // create an instance of an anonymous class
	      @Override                                              // that implements the interface EventHandler
	      public void setOnAction(ActionEvent e) {               // Here we must override the abstract method
		.... necessary code here ....
	      }
	    });
```
The value passed into the `setOnAction` method is the instance of a class that implements the `EventHandler` interface.

This class has no name, but because it is an `EventHandler`, we can use this instance anywhere that expects an `EventHandler`.

Anonymous classes are very useful when we only need to create a single instance of a class and we are only overriding methods.

In these cases, why should we create a separate public class file when we can just define the class where needed in the code?

Because the anonymous class is created at a specific line of code, it has access to everything available at that line.
For example, if you create the anonymous class inside a method, __it will have access to the local variables of the method.__

However, this can create a problem because local variables are allocated from the stack while the instance of the anonymous class is allocated from the heap.  __Thus, when the method ends, the anonymous class still exists but those local variables are gone.__

So, if you want an anonymous class to use a local variable, __that variable must be declared "final".__

Recall that a "final" variable is a variable that will not change values.  Thus, Java can safely copy the value of the variable to another location that is not the stack. There will be no chance that the variable value will change.
