# Threads and Java GUIs, and `JavaFX` Properties

All GUIs in Java are multi-threaded and use 2 different threads by default. There is the main thread.  This is the thread that runs the main method, the constructor for the class, etc. Then, there is a thread that does all the display to the screen.
* Similar to Java Swing (main thread and event dispatch thread)

## Threads and JavaFX

In `JavaFX`, the thread that __displays to the screen__ is called the `JavaFX application thread`.
* The `start` method as well as the `event handler handle methods` are run in the JavaFX application thread.
* __Problem:__ The application thread is running the handle methods.  __If there is time consuming code run by the handle method, our GUI will freeze while that code runs.__
* The `BadFXGUI` example is an example that demonstrates this problem.  The different buttons cause different actions, with the sort button taking a long time.  While the sort is going on, the window is frozen.

### How JavaFX deals with multi-threads
JavaFX adds a few classes to make it a little easier to work with threads.

1. The `Task` class is used to __collect code that is time consuming__ that we do not want run on the JavaFX application thread.  We then place the Task into a Thread so that the code is __run on a different thread from the JavaFX application thread.__

2. __To communicate between threads,__ `JavaFX` provides a simple coding solution called "`properties`".

## JavaFX Properties

A "`property`" is a __private field along with a public (or protected) getter/setter method pair.__  (If a property is "read only" then it will have just the getter method.)

The `Property` class of `JavaFX` provides routines that manipulate the field, getter and setter methods.  To make sure we don't get confused, coders who use the Property class should follow standard naming schemes (which we are already using in class).

For example, the Button class has a "boolean property" `cancelButton` that means it has:
- a private boolean field called `cancelButton`
- a public or protected getter method called `isCancelButton()`
- a public or protected setter method called `setCancelButton(boolean)`
- a public or protected method that returns a `BooleanProperty` called `cancelButtonProperty()`

For another example, `ProgressBar` has a "double property" progress that means it has:
- a private double field called `progress`
- public or protected getter method called `getProgress()`
- a public or protected setter method called `setProgress(double)`
- a public or protected method that returns a `DoubleProperty` called `progressProperty()`

### bind method
__One very useful method of the Property class is `bind`.__
* This links the values of the property of one class with the property of another class so __both fields will store the same values.__
* This will __even work if the two classes are being run by different threads!__

For example, we can bind the `progress` "property" of a `Task` with the `progress` "property" of a `ProgressBar`.
 > `bar.progressProperty().bind(task.progressProperty());`

The `bind` method does a lot for us that would otherwise require a lot of coding on our part! When the task's progress field changes (by calling it's setter method), the Task's `progressProperty` (running on the task's thread) sends an event to the JavaFX Application thread.

An `EventHandler` in the `ProgressBar`'s `progressProperty`'s code (running on the `JavaFX` application thread) listens for the event, and when the event arrives, it uses the setter method of it's progress property to update it's progress field and update the GUI display.

`GoodFXGUI` does the same as `BadFXGUI`, but `GoodFXGUI` uses a `Task` to move to slow processing off of the `JavaFX` application thread so that it does not freeze the GUI.  `GoodFXGUI` uses `JavaFX` properties to communicate from the task back to the `JavaFX` thread so that the progress bars on the GUI can be updated correctly.
