# A review of Nested and Anonymous classes
* __Static nested classes:__ used the same as "normal" classes except they are located inside another class.
	- these classes have access to all the static elements of the containing class.

* __Non-static nested classes:__
  - you must create an instance of the containing class before you can create an instance of the nested class.
  - these classes have access to all the static and non-static elements of the containing class.
  - there are two "this" values in the instance methods of the nested class.  One for the nested class instance and one for the containing class instance.
  - there is the different way of creating objects using new when outside of the containing class.

	* __Local classes:__
		- created in a method
		- can have access to all the fields and local variables available to the code where the class is created.
		- __any local variable accessed by the class must be final so that the variable can be moved off of the stack__
		- there can be two "this" values in the body of an local class (assuming it was created inside a non-static method body

	* __Anonymous classes:__
		- A local class that is created at the same step as the "new" operator.

# Nested Classes and Generic Types
When we look at the API for `LinkedList`, we see no mention of an `LLNode` class, but there -must- be one to be a linked list!  Why don't we see one?  They must have the `LLNode` as a private nested class.  In class, we did the same thing in
* `List1`:  a linked list with a private static nested class for the nodes
* `List2`:  a linked list with a private non-static nested class for the nodes.

## Generics and Static Nested Classes

Because the nested class is __static__ the __nested class does not have access to the generic type of the containing class.__  (The generic type only applies to instances of the class.)

Thus, we __need to define a generic for the nested class.__ Specifically, our nested class Node needs its own generic type declaration. As a result, we specify the generic on our Node class as:
```
	Node<T> node
```
or for it's "full name"
```
	List1.Node<T> node
```
To create a member of the nested class Node from outside the `List1` class, we can use exactly the same Java terminology we use to create other objects and to
access static fields and methods:
```
  List1.Node<String> node = new List1.Node<String>("Hi", null);
```
Note that the generic goes on the Node class.  __We do not need to specify the generic for `List1` because we are not creating an instance of `List1`.__
  * (It is not an error to specify the generic for `List1`, but Java will ignore that generic since no instance is being created.)

## Generics and Non-static Nested Classes

* With a __non-static__ nested class, the __nested class does have access to the generic of the containing class.__ Thus the nested class Node of `List2` does not need its own generic.
  * Note that in `List2`, the Nodes no longer have generic specifications and our code is a little cleaner.
* In `List2`, we left the iterator as a static nested class * to demonstrate how we have to now specify the generic on Node.
* In the `List2` iterator, we need to make sure the `List2`'s `Node`'s generic matches the generic of the `List2Iterator`.
* We can't say `Node<T>` because Node does not take a generic. The generic goes with the containing class `List2`.  So, we give Node's full name `List2.Node`, and we place the generic on `List2` (the generic is declared in List2's header, not Node's).
```
	List2<T>.Node node
```
In general, non-static nested classes can be more useful because they have access to all the non-static fields and method of the containing class, but they can be a little trickier to use.

To create a member of the nested class `Node` from outside the `List2` class, we do something similar as with the non-static nested class, but now we must create
an instance of the outer class first.  Note the difference with the `new` operator and note that we now specify the generic with the outer class:
```
  List2<String> list = new List2<String>();
  List2<String>.Node node = list.new Node("Hi", null);
```
