# Sorting, Comparator, and an Intro to Nested Classes

# Comparator

The `Comparator` interface is used to indicate how we order data. It is similar to the `Comparable` interface with the difference being that we use `Comparable` for the default ordering and `Comparator` for any other ordering. For example, we made Employee `Comparable` and made the default to be to order by employee name.

We can now create a `Comparator` to order by salary:
```
  public static Comparator<Employee> compareBySalary() {
     return new CompareBySalary();
  }
```
The method above just returns a `Comparator`, and we now have to make the class `CompareBySalary` that implements `Comparator<Employee>`.

# An Introduction to Nested Classes

So far, if we needed a new class, we created a separate file for the class.  __However, we can create a class inside of another class.__

To do so, we just place the class header inside another class body.  The header is exactly the same as before except:
1. __The access modifier can be anything.__  It does not have to be public.
2. __The class can be static or non-static.__ The rules for the access modifer and static/non-static are the same as for fields.  Static means owned by the class and non-static means owned by the object.

We decided to make the `CompareByEmployee` a private static nested class of Employee.
```
 private static class CompareBySalary implements Comparator<Employee> {

     public int compare(Employee e1, Employee e2) {
       return (int)((e1.getSalary() - e2.getSalary()) * 100);
     }
   };
 }
```
The `Comparator` interface has a single method stub that takes two values of type T and returns < 0, =0, or > 0 depending on if the first must come before the second, the same as the second, or after the second.

Here is the method to create a `Comparator` for salary.  Since the salary is a double, we decided that if two salaries are within a fraction of a penny, they should be considered equal.


How would you access the nested class?  Because it is static, you access it exactly as you do a static field.
If the class were public, you could write:
```
Employee.CompareBySalary c = new Employee.CompareBySalary();
```

## Using the Comparator and Comparable

Suppose we have an array storing Employees:  Employee[] workers.  We can sort the array by name:
```  
Arrays.sort(workers)
```
  or we can sort the array by salary:
```
Arrays.sort(workers, Employee.compareBySalary())
```
Arrays is a class that has a lot of useful methods for arrays.
