# Anonymous Classes

## Summary
* __Anonymous classes are really useful when you need to create "small" classes that have a single use.__
  * This way you do not have to create additional files or come up with new type names.
  * i.e. arrow functions :) in JS
* __Syntax__
  ```
  	Comparator<Employee> c = new Comparator<Employee>() {
  	  public int compare(Employee e1, Employee e2) {
  	    return e1.getNumber() - e2.getNumber();
  	  }
  	};
  ```

## Explanation
__You can create classes directly inside the body of a method.__ There are two ways to do this, and we are going to focus on the anonymous class because that is used more often.
The textbook shows the other way of creating a "local class".

__An anonymous class has no name.__ Instead, you just state what interface or class you are extending (implementing).  For example, suppose we want to create a class that implements the `Comparator<Employee>` instance.
```
	Comparator<Employee> c = new Comparator<Employee>() {
```
The curly brace { indicates that we are creating an anonymous class that implements `Comparator<Employee>`. __Inside the `{ }`, you place all fields and methods you want for the class.__

What we need to do is override the abstract compare method.
```
	Comparator<Employee> c = new Comparator<Employee>() {
	  public int compare(Employee e1, Employee e2) {
	    return e1.getNumber() - e2.getNumber();
	  }
	};
```
Now, in that line of code we both created a class that implements `Comparator<Employee>`, created an instance of
that class, and assigned the address to the instance to the variable `c`.

__Anonymous classes are really useful when you need to create "small" classes that have a single use.__ This way you do not have to create additional files or come up with new type names.

An anonymous class __has access to everything the method it is inside has access to.__ (because scopes)
* __If the method is non-static,__ the anonymous class also has access to the instance fields and methods. The anonymous class has access to all local variables and parameters of the method, __BUT the anonymous class is stored in the heap while local variables and method parameters are stored on the stack.__
  * This memory difference can cause errors so Java __limits to anonymous class to only use local variables if they are final.__  (Java will automatically make them final.)
    * We will see an example of this in a later lesson.
